According to simplified Newtonian physics, if an object is dropped from an elevation 1  of 200 meters (m) and allowed to free fall to the ground, then the elevation of the object is given by the position function

    p( t ) = 200m - ( 4.9 m/s^2 ) t^2

# 1

### Calculate p(3s) and p(5s). Make sure that you include the units specified in the formula for p(t), and p(t) that you replace t with, respectively, 3 s and 5 s. Make sure that you simplify the units, as well as the numerical part of the function value.

    p(3 s) = 200m - (4.9 m/s^2) (3 s)^2
           = 155.9 m

    p(5 s) = 200m - (4.9 m/s^2) (5 s)^2
           = 77.5 m

p(3 s) represents the height of the height of the object three seconds after being dropped. p(5 s) represents the height of the height of the object five seconds after being dropped.

# 2

### Calculate `( p(5s) − p(3s) ) / ( 5s − 3s )`; include units while making the calculation. Note that you already calculated p(3s) and p(5s) in Exercise 1.1.1.1. What does the result tell you in the context of this problem?

    ( p(5s) − p(3s) ) / ( 5s − 3s ) = -39.2 m / s

The result of this expression represents the object's average velocity between time 3s and 5s.

# 3

### Use Definition 1.1.1 to find a formula for the average velocity of this object over the general time interval [t0,t1]. The first couple of lines of this process are shown below. Copy these lines onto your paper and continue the simplification process.

    ( p(t1) - p(t0) ) / (t1 - t0)
      = (( 200 - 4.9 t1^2 ) - ( 200m 4.9 t0^2 )) / (t1 - t0)
      = ( 200 - 4.9 t1^2 - 200 + 4.9 t0^2 ) / (t1 - t0)
      = ( -4.9 t1^2 + 4.9 t0^2 ) / (t1 - t0)
      = -4.9 ( t1^2 - t0^2 ) / ( t1 - t0 )
      = -4.9 ( t1 + t0 ) ( t1 - t0 ) / ( t1 - t0 )
      = -4.9 ( t1 + t0 )
      = - 4.9t1 - 4.9t0

    g(t0, t1) = - 4.9t1 - 4.9t0

That's neat.

# 4

### Check the formula you derived in Exercise 1.1.1.3 using t0=3 and t1=5; that is, compare the value generated by the formula to that you found in Exercise 1.1.1.2.

    # previous results
    ( p(5s) − p(3s) ) / ( 5s − 3s )
      = -39.2 m / s

    # our results
    g(3, 5)
      = - 4.9 * 5 - 4.9 * 3
      = -39.2

Same number, different units; I dropped the units. I s'pose that's ok.

# 5

### Now explore some average velocities in tabular form.

Using the formula found in Exercise 1.1.1.3, replace t0 with 3 but leave t1 as a variable; simplify the result. Then copy Table 1.1.3 onto your paper and fill in the missing entries.

| t1 / s       | g(3, t1) / (m/s) |
| :----------- | :--------------- |
| 2.9          | -28.91           |
| 2.99         | -29.351          |
| 2.999        | -29.3951         |
| 2.999999999  | -29.3999999951   |
| 3.0000000001 | -29.4000000005   |
| 3.001        | -29.4049         |
| 3.01         | -29.449          |
| 3.1          | -29.89           |

# 6

### As the value of t1 gets closer to 3, the values in the y-column of Table 1.1.3 appear to be converging on a single quantity; what is this quantity? What does it mean in the context of this problem?

Values for `g(3 s, t1)` seem to converge on -29.4 m/s as t1 approaches 3. That must be the instantaneous velocity when `t = 3 s`.
